{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf190
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl900\margr900\margb0\margt900\vieww12000\viewh14600\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs15 \cf0 \'cfIt. 
\f1 SAND COUNTY ALMANAC \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl348\sa685\qj

\fs26 \cf0 constituted mainly as a fitting interlude between Octobers, and I suspect that 
\f2\fs21 dogs~ 
\f1\fs26 and 
\fs25 perhaps grouse, 
\fs26 share the same view. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa767

\i\fs32 \cf0 November 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1055\ri530\sl353\sa505

\fs26 \cf0 If I Were the Wind 
\fs25 The wind 
\fs26 that 
\fs25 makes music 
\f0 in 
\f1\fs26 November 
\fs25 corn is in a 
\fs28 hurry. 
\fs25 The stalks 
\f2\fs21 hum~ 
\f1\fs25 the loose husks whisk skyward 
\fs28 in 
\fs25 halfp1a
\fs27 yful 
\fs25 swirls, 
\fs26 and 
\fs25 the 
\fs29 wind 
\fs25 hurries on. 
\fs26 In the marsh, long 
\fs27 Windy 
\fs26 waves surge across the 
\fs27 grassy 
\fs26 sloughs, beat against 
\fs25 the 
\fs26 far willows. A tree tries to 
\fs25 argue, 
\fs26 bare limbs waving, but 
\fs25 there 
\fs26 is no detaining the 
\f2\fs21 w~nd. 
\f1\fs26 On 
\fs25 the 
\fs26 sandbar 
\f2\fs22 th~re 
\f1\fs26 is 
\fs29 only 
\fs26 wind, and the river sliding seaward. 
\fs25 Every 
\fs26 wisp of grass is drawing circles on the sand. 
\f0\fs23 I 
\f1\fs25 wander over the bar to a driftwood log, where I sit and 
\fs26 listen to the 
\fs25 universal 
\fs26 roar, 
\fs25 and to 
\fs26 the tinkle of 
\fs25 wavelets on the shore. The river is lifeless: 
\fs26 not 
\fs25 a duck, heron, 
\fs26 nlarsh
\fs25 hawk;t or gull but has sought refuge 
\fs29 from 
\fs25 wind. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl348\qj

\fs26 \cf0 Out of the clouds I hear a faint bark, as 
\f0 of 
\f1 a far ..away dog. 
\fs27 It 
\fs26 is strange how the world cocks its ears at 
\fs28 that 
\fs26 sound, won
\fs28 dering. Soon 
\fs27 it 
\f0\fs25 is 
\f1\fs28 louder: the honk of geese, invisible, but 
\fs26 coming all. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi262\sl343\sa147\qj
\cf0 The flock emerges from the low clouds, a 
\fs25 tattered 
\fs26 banner of birds, dipping and rising, blown up and blown d.own, 
\fs25 blown together and 
\fs26 blown 
\fs25 apart, but advancing, the 
\fs29 wind 
\fs25 wrestling 
\fs26 lovingly 
\fs28 with 
\fs26 each wirmowing wing. 
\fs25 When 
\fs26 the \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa1070\qc

\f0\fs27 \cf0 I 
\f1\fs22 86] \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa225\qc

\f2\fs25 \cf0 ,':;;~;~~~~~~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li530\ri1500

\fs4 \cf0 .~ 
\f1 .... 1 ,.', \'95 
\f2 ~ ~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qj

\f1\fs17 \cf0 NOVEMBER \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl411\sa505\qj

\fs27 \cf0 flock is a blur 
\fs26 in" 
\fs27 the 
\fs26 far 
\fs29 sky 
\f0\fs25 I 
\f1\fs26 hear 
\fs27 the last honk, sounding taps for summer. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl348\sa767\qj
\cf0 It is warm behind the driftwood now, for the wind has gone with the geese. 
\fs26 So 
\fs27 would I-if I were 
\fs26 the 
\fs27 wind. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa1273\qj

\f0\fs12 \cf0 i \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa3675

\fs116 \cf0 \dn99 \sub I 
\fs2 \up0 \nosupersub I \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1087\sl440

\f1\fs26 \cf0 Axe-in-Hand 
\fs27 The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, but 
\fs28 He" 
\fs27 is no \
\pard\pardeftab720\li8640

\f2\fs17 \cf0 ~".~" 
\f0\fs19 !\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri1672\sl356\sa75

\f1\fs26 \cf0 longer the 
\fs29 only 
\fs26 one to do so. 
\fs27 When 
\fs26 some remote ancestor 
\fs27 of ours invented the shovel, he became a giver: he could plant a tree. 
\f2\fs23 ~nd 
\f1\fs27 when the axe was invented, he became a 
\fs26 taker: he could chop it 
\fs27 down. 
\fs26 Whoever owns 
\fs27 land has 
\fs26 thus 
\fs27 assumed, whether he knows it or not, the divine functions 
\fs26 of creating and 
\fs27 destroying 
\fs26 plants. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3360\sa2140

\fs23 \cf0 [67 ] \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f0\fs36 \cf0 J \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa300
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa340
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li4220\sa75

\f1\fs15 \cf0 A SAND COUNTY ALMANAC \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi262\sl340\sa505

\fs26 \cf0 Other 
\fs25 ancestors) 
\fs26 less remote, have since invented other tools, but each of these, upon close scrutiny, proves to be 
\f0\fs28 i' 
\f1\fs26 either an elaboration of, or an accessory to, the original pair 
\f0\fs20 I" 
\f1\fs26 of basic implements. We classify 
\fs25 ourselves 
\fs26 into vocations, each of which either wields some particular tool, or sells 
\fs25 it, 
\fs26 or repairs 
\fs23 it, 
\fs26 or sharpens 
\f0\fs23 i
\i\fs21 tj 
\f1\i0\fs26 or dispenses advice on how to do 
\fs25 so; 
\f0\fs26 by 
\f1\fs25 such division of labors we avoid responsibility for the misuse of 
\fs26 any 
\fs25 tool save our own. But there is one voca
\f2\fs21 tion~philosophy-which 
\f1\fs26 kno\\vs that all men, 
\f0\fs27 by 
\f1\fs26 what they think about and wish for, in effect wield all 
\fs25 tools. 
\fs26 It knows that men thus determine, 
\f0 by 
\f1 their manner of thinking and wishing, whether it is worth while to wield any. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri1090\sl338
\cf0 November is, for 
\fs27 many 
\f2\fs21 reasons~ 
\f1\fs26 the month for the axe. It is wann enough to grind an axe without freezing, but cold enough to feU a tree 
\f0\fs25 in 
\f1\fs26 comfort. The leaves are off the hardwoods, so that one can see just how the branches intertwine, 
\fs25 and what growth occurred last summer. Without this clear 
\fs26 view of treetops, one cannot be sure '\\vhich tree, 
\fs30 if 
\fs26 any, 
\fs25 needs felling for the good of the land. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi262\ri725\sl348

\fs26 \cf0 I have read many definitions of what is a conservationist, 
\fs25 and written not a few 
\fs26 myself, 
\fs25 but 
\f0\fs23 I 
\f1\fs25 suspect that the best one 
\fs26 is written not with a pen, but with an axe. It is 
\f0\fs23 ,a 
\f1\fs26 matter of what 
\fs25 a man thinks about 
\fs26 while chopping, or while deciding 
\fs25 what to chop. A conservationist is one who is 
\fs27 humbly 
\fs25 aware 
\fs35 ij.x 
\fs25 that \\vith each 
\fs26 stroke 
\fs25 he is writing his signature on the face 
\fs26 of 
\i\fs27 his 
\i0\fs26 land. Signatures 
\fs27 of 
\fs26 course 
\fs27 differ, 
\fs26 whether written with axe or 
\fs25 pen, 
\fs26 and this is as 
\fs23 it 
\fs26 should be.. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi257\ri1077\sl348\sa147
\cf0 I find 
\fs23 it 
\fs26 disconcerting to analyze, 
\i\fs29 ex post facto, 
\i0\fs26 the reasons behind 
\fs30 my 
\fs26 o\\vn axe ..in-hand decisions. I find, first of all, that not all trees are created free and equal. Where a white pine \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3185

\f0\fs20 \cf0 [ 68\} \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs5 \cf0 " 
\fs12 , \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa210\qc

\i\fs7 \cf0 .... r. 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qj

\f1\fs16 \cf0 NOVEMBER \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl348\qj

\fs27 \cf0 and a red birch are crowding each other, 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs27 have an 
\f0\i\fs25 a priori 
\f1\i0\fs26 bias; 
\fs28 I 
\fs26 always cut the birch to favor the pine. 
\fs28 Why? \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi262\sl343\qj
\cf0 vVell, 
\fs26 fust of all, 
\fs28 I 
\fs26 planted the pine 
\fs27 with 
\fs30 my shovel, 
\fs26 whereas the 
\fs27 birch crawled 
\fs25 in 
\fs26 under the fence and planted itself. 
\fs30 My 
\fs26 bias is thus to some extent paternal, 
\fs25 but 
\fs26 this cannot be the whole story, for 
\fs28 if 
\fs26 the pine were a natural seedling like the birch, I would value 
\fs25 it 
\fs26 even more. So I must dig deeper for the logic, 
\fs29 if 
\fs26 any, behind my bias. \

\fs27 The birch is an abundant tree in 
\fs30 my 
\fs27 township and be
\fs26 coming more so, whereas pine is scarce and becoming scarcer; perhaps 
\fs30 my 
\fs26 bias is for the underdog. But what would I do 
\f0\fs28 if 
\f1 my 
\fs26 farm were further north, where pine is abundant and red birch is scarce? I confess I 
\fs27 don't know. 
\f0 My 
\f1\fs25 farm is here. \

\fs28 The pine will live for a 
\fs27 century, 
\fs28 the birch for half 
\fs25 that; 
\fs27 do I fear that 
\fs28 my 
\fs26 signature 
\fs27 will fade? 
\fs30 My 
\fs26 neighbors 
\fs27 have planted no pines but all have 
\fs28 many 
\fs27 birches; am I snobbish 
\fs26 about having 
\fs25 a woodlot 
\fs26 of distinction? 
\fs25 The pine 
\fs26 stays green 
\fs30 all 
\fs26 winter, the birch punches the clock in October; do 
\f0\fs25 I 
\f1\fs26 favor 
\fs27 the tree that, like 
\fs26 myself, 
\fs27 braves 
\fs25 the winter 
\fs27 wind? 
\fs26 The 
\fs25 pine 
\fs27 will shelter a grouse but the birch 
\fs26 will 
\fs27 feed him; do 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs25 con
\fs26 sider bed more important than 
\fs27 board? 
\fs26 The pine will ulti ... mately 
\fs27 bring ten dollars 
\fs26 a thousand, 
\fs27 the birch two dollars; have 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs27 an 
\fs26 eye 
\fs27 on the bank? All of these 
\fs26 possible reasons 
\fs27 for 
\fs30 my 
\fs26 bias seem to 
\fs25 carry 
\fs26 some weight, but none of them carries very much. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi262\sl343\sa147\qj

\fs27 \cf0 So I 
\fs28 try 
\fs27 again, 
\fs26 and 
\fs27 here perhaps 
\fs26 is something; under 
\fs27 this 
\fs26 pine 
\fs27 will ultimately 
\fs26 grow a trailing arbutus, 
\fs27 an 
\fs26 Indian pipe, 
\fs27 a 
\fs26 pyrola, 
\fs27 or 
\fs26 a 
\fs27 twin flower, \\vhereas 
\fs26 under 
\fs27 the birch a bottle 
\fs26 gentian is about the best 
\fs27 to 
\fs26 be hoped for. 
\fs27 In 
\fs26 this pine a pileated woodpecker will ultimately chisel out a nest; in the 
\fs25 birch 
\fs26 a 
\fs27 hairy 
\fs26 \\vill 
\fs25 have 
\fs26 to suffice. In this pine the wind \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa922\qc

\fs22 \cf0 [69 ] \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa880
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa1040
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li4737\sa75\qj

\b\fs16 \cf0 A SAND COUNTY 
\f2\b0\fs18 AL1~ANAC \
\pard\pardeftab720\li445\sl336\qj

\f1\fs26 \cf0 will sing for me in April, at which time the birch is only rattling naked tWigs. These possible reasons for my bias calTY weight, but why? Does the pine stimulate my imagination and my hopes more deeply than the birch does? 
\f0 If \
\pard\pardeftab720\li437\sa225\qj

\f1\b\fs23 \cf0 so, 
\f0\i is 
\f1\i0 the 
\f0\i difference 
\f1\i0 in the trees, or in me? 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1587\sa283\qj

\f0\i\fs9 \cf0 .I
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li660\qj

\f1\fs26 \cf0 The onlv conclusion I have ever reached is that 
\f0\fs21 J[ 
\f1\fs26 love \
\pard\pardeftab720\li310\sa75\qj

\b\fs23 \cf0 all trees, but I am in 
\i\fs26 love 
\i0\fs23 with pines. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li322\ri107\sl338\qj

\fs28 \cf0 As 
\fs26 I said, November is the month for the axe, and, as in other love affairs, there is 
\fs29 skill 
\fs26 in the exercise of bias. 
\f0\fs27 1\'a3 
\f1\fs26 the birch stands south of the pine, and is taller, it will shade the pine's Jeader in the spring, and thus discourage the pine weevil from laying her eggs tllere. Birch competition 
\fs25 is 
\fs26 a \
\pard\pardeftab720\li250\ri180\sl338
\cf0 minor afi:liction compared with this weevil, whose progeny 
\fs28 kill 
\fs26 the pine's leader and thus deform the tree. It is interesting to meditate that this insect's preference for squatting in the Sun determines not only her owu continuity as a species, but also the future figure of my pine, 
\fs27 and 
\fs26 my own success \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li250\sa75\qj

\f1\b\fs23 \cf0 as a wielder 
\b0\fs26 of axe 
\b\fs23 and 
\fs26 shovel. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li185\fi267\ri290\sl338\qj
\cf0 Again, 
\fs27 if 
\fs26 a drouthy summer follows my removal of the birch's sllade, the hotter soil may offset the lesser competition for water, and my 
\i\fs25 pine 
\i0\fs26 be none the better for my bias. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li90\fi275\sl333\qj
\cf0 Lastly, 
\f0\fs27 if 
\f1\fs26 the birch's limbs rub the pine's terminal buds during a wind, the pine will surely be deformed, and the birch must either be removed regardless of other considerations, or 
\i\fs25 else 
\i0 it 
\fs26 must be pruned of limbs each winter to a height greater than the pine's proSpective summer growth. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi292\ri432\sl338\sa45\qj
\cf0 Such are the pros and cons the wielder of 
\fs27 an 
\fs26 axe must foresee, L'Ompare, and decide upon with the calm assurance that 11is bias will, on the average, prove to be something \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa147\qj

\f1\b\fs23 \cf0 more than good intentions. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi275\ri500\sl323\sa147\qj

\fs26 \cf0 The wielder of an axe has as many biases as there are species of trees on 
\fs29 his 
\fs26 farm. 
\b\fs29 In 
\b0\fs26 the course of the years he \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3125\sa1070\qj

\i\b\fs23 \cf0 [ 70 
\f0\fs28 1 
\i0\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li250\sa147\qj

\f1\fs14 \cf0 NOVEMBER \
\pard\pardeftab720\li260\sl318\qj

\fs23 \cf0 imputes to each species, from his responses to their beauty or utility, and their responses to his labors for or against them, a series of attributes that constitute a character. I am amazed to learn what diverse characters different men im\
\pard\pardeftab720\li250\sa75\qj
\cf0 pute to one and the same tree. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li207\fi250\sl320\qj
\cf0 Thus to me the aspen is in good repute because he glorifies October and he feeds 
\f0 my 
\f1 grouse in winter, but to some of 
\f0\fs14 D1y 
\f1\fs23 neighbors he is a n1ere weed, perhaps because he sprouted so vigorously 
\fs22 in 
\fs23 the stump lots their grandfathers were attempting to clear. (1 cannot sneer at this, for I find myself disliking the 
\fs22 elms whose 
\fs23 resproutings threaten 
\f0 my 
\f1 pines.) \
\pard\pardeftab720\li172\fi245\sl318\sa75
\cf0 Again, 
\fs25 the 
\f2\fs27 ~arack 
\f1\fs23 is to me a favorite second 
\fs26 only 
\fs23 to white pine, perhaps because he is 
\fs25 nearly 
\fs23 extinct 
\f0 in 
\f1\fs25 my 
\fs23 to\\vn
\fs25 ship 
\fs23 (underdog bias), 
\fs25 or 
\fs23 because he sprinkles 
\fs25 gold on 
\fs23 October grouse (gunpowder bias), or because he sours the soil and enables 
\fs22 it 
\fs23 to grow 
\fs26 the 
\fs23 loveliest 
\fs26 of 
\fs23 our orchids, the showy 
\fs25 lady's-slipper. On the other 
\fs23 hand, foresters 
\fs25 have 
\fs23 excommunicated the tamarack because 
\fs26 he 
\fs23 grows too 
\fs25 slow'ly 
\fs23 to 
\fs27 pay 
\fs23 compound interest. In order to clinch this dispute, they also mention that he succumbs periodically to 
\f2\fs30 e.E!~o
\f1\fs25 oges 
\fs23 of 
\f2\fs27 ~~y,
\f1\fs23 but this is 
\f0\fs25 fifty 
\f1\fs23 years hence for 
\fs25 my 
\fs23 tamaracks, so 
\f0 I 
\f1 shall let 
\fs26 my 
\fs23 grandson worry about it. Meanwhile 
\fs26 Iny \
\pard\pardeftab720\li127\ri135\sl246\sa75\qj

\fs23 \cf0 tamaracks are' growing so lustily that my spirits soar with 
\fs28 them, skyward. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs23 \cf0 To me an ancient cottonwood is the greatest of trees \
\pard\pardeftab720\li110\fi-110\ri150\sl311\sa75\qj
\cf0 ' because in his 
\fs25 youth 
\fs23 he shaded the buffalo and wore a halo of pigeons, and I like a young cottonwood because he may some 
\fs25 day 
\fs23 become ancient. But the farmels wife (and hence 
\fs25 the 
\fs23 farmer) despises all cottonwoods because in June the female tree cIags the screens with cotton. The modern dogma is comfort at 
\fs25 any 
\fs23 cost. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\fs27 \cf0 I \'a3nd 
\fs23 my biases more numerous than those of 
\fs26 my 
\fs23 neigh.. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs20 \cf0 [ 71 ] \
\pard\pardeftab720\li7480\qj

\b\fs16 \cf0 A SAND COUNTY ALMANAC 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3190\sl343\qj
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\fs27 \cf0 bors because I have individual likings for many species that they lump under one aspersive category: brush. Thus I like the wahoo, partly because deer, rabbits, and mice are so \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3160\fi640\sl333\qj
\cf0 to eat his 
\f2\fs32 ~quare 
\f1\fs27 twigs and green bark and partly because his cerise berries glow so warmly against November \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3927\qj

\f0\b\fs26 \cf0 I 
\f1\fs25 like the red dogwood because he feeds October 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3095\sl346\qj

\fs27 \cf0 robins, and the prickly ash because my woodcock take their daily sunbath under the shelter of rus thorns. I like the hazel because his October purple feeds my eye, and because his November catkins feed my deer and grouse. I like the bitter\
\pard\pardeftab720\li212\ri132\sl340\qj

\b\fs25 \cf0 sweet because 
\f0 my 
\f1 father did, and because the deer, on 
\fs23 tIle 
\fs28 1st 
\fs25 of 
\fs32 July 
\fs28 of 
\fs25 each 
\fs28 year, 
\fs25 begin suddenly to eat the new 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li212\ri132\sl340\qj

\fs27 \cf0 leaves, and I have learned to predict this event to my guests. 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs27 cannot dislike a plant that enables me, a mere 
\i professor, 
\i0 to blossom forth annually as a successful seer and prophet. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li145\fi272\ri177\sl343\qj
\cf0 It is evident that our plant biases are 
\i\fs29 in 
\i0\fs27 part traditional. 
\f0\fs26 If 
\f1\fs27 your grandfather liked hickory nuts, you will like the hickory tree because your father told you to. 
\f0 If, 
\f1 on the other hand, your grandfather burned a log carrying a poison ivy \
\pard\pardeftab720\li140\ri237\qj

\b\fs25 \cf0 vine and recklessly stood in the smoke, you will dislike the 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li117\ri217\sl343\sa75\qj

\fs27 \cf0 species, no matter with what crimson glOries it wanns your \
\pard\pardeftab720\li132\sa147\qj

\b\fs25 \cf0 eyes 
\fs23 each 
\fs28 fall. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li90\fi275\sl333\qj

\f0\fs27 \cf0 It 
\f1 is also evident that our plant biases reflect not only vocations but avocations, with a delicate allocation of priority \
\pard\pardeftab720\li80\ri297\qj

\b\fs25 \cf0 as bet""een industry and indolence. The farmer who 
\fs28 would 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li80\ri297\qj

\fs27 \cf0 rather hunt grouse than milk cows 
\fs30 will 
\fs27 not dislike hawthorn, \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri320\sl338\qj

\b\fs25 \cf0 no matter 
\f0\i\fs27 if 
\fs23 it 
\f1\i0\fs25 does 
\fs26 invade 
\fs25 his pasture. 
\fs26 The 
\fs25 coon-hunter will not dislike bass\\vood, and I 
\fs26 know 
\fs25 of quail hunters who bear no grudge against ragweed, despite their annual bout with 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri320\sl338\sa75\qj

\fs27 \cf0 hayfever. Our biases are indeed a sensitive index to our \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri337\sl288\sa147\qj

\b\fs23 \cf0 affections, our tastes, Our 
\fs25 loyalties, our 
\fs23 generosities, 
\fs25 and our manner of 
\f2\b0\fs23 '~lasting 
\f1\b\fs25 weekends. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa1147\qc

\b\fs23 \cf0 [ 72 ] 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\sa225\qj

\i\fs25 \cf0 516 Wendell Berry 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\sa75\qj

\fs23 \cf0 huge (but, so far, very gradual) slide that starts at the river and, aggra .. \
vated by two state highway cuts, goes almost to the hilltop. 
\fs28 And 
\f0\fs21 We \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\qj

\f1\fs23 \cf0 have serious river bank erosion the whole length of our place. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\fi417\sl378\qj
\cf0 What this means is that, no matter how successfully we may 
\fs29 Control 
\fs23 erosion on our hillsides, our land remains susceptible to a more serious cause of erosion that we cannot control. Our river bank stands literally 
\fs28 at 
\fs23 the cutting edge of our nation's consumptive economy. This, I think, is true of many "marginal" places-it is true, in fact, of many places 
\fs28 that 
\fs23 are not marginal. In its consciousness, ours is an upland society; the ruin of watersheds, and what that involves and means, is little considered. And so the land is heavily taxed to subsidize an "affluence" that consists 
\f0 \dn10 \sub , 
\f1 \up0 \nosupersub in reality, of health and goods stolen from the unborn. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\fi417\sl378\sa370\qj
\cf0 Living at the lower end of the Kentucky River watershed is what is now known as "an educational experience"-and not an easy one. A lot of information comes with it that is severely damaging to the 
\f2\fs19 reputa~ 
\f1\fs23 tion of our people and our time. From where I live and work, I never have to look 'far to see that the earth does indeed pass away. But 
\fs28 how. 
\fs23 ever that is taught, and however bitterly learned, it is something that should be known, and there is a certain good strength in knowing it. 
\fs28 To 
\fs23 spend one's life farming a piece of the earth so passing is, as many would say, a hard lot. But it is, in an ancient sense, the hun1an lot. What saves it is to love the farn1ing. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li6015\qj

\i \cf0 Recollected Essays (1981) 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\sa75\qj

\f0\i\b\fs32 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 
\i0\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li7075\qj

\fs82 \cf0 CD \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\sa75\qj

\f1\fs75 \cf0 CD 
\f0\fs7 T.. \'95..\'95\
\pard\pardeftab720\li867\sa283\qj
\cf0 \'95.\'95. \'95.. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1422\sa225\qj

\f1\fs23 \cf0 he argument over the proper relation of humanity to nature is be\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa220
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi645\sl380\qj
\cf0 coming, as the sixties used to say, polarized. And the result, as before, is bad talk on both sides. At one extreme are those who sound as if they are entirely in favor of nature; they assume that there is no \
\pard\pardeftab720\li4882\sa147

\i\fs26 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 517 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li740\sl383\sa75

\fs25 \cf0 necessary disjuncture or difference between the human estate and the estate of nature, that human good is in some simple way the same as natural good. They believe, at least in principle, that the biosphere is an egalitarian system, in which all creatures, including humans, are equal 
\fs42 in 
\fs25 value and have ;n equal right to live and flourish. These people tend to stand aloof from the k,",sue of the prm;>er human use of nature. Indeed, they have begun to use "stewardship" (meaning the responsible use of \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\f0\fs13 \cf0 . __ I 
\f1\fs12 _c__ .._' c .,c. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li302\fi417\sl378\sa225

\fs25 \cf0 nature) as a term of denigration. 
\f2 ~
\f1 At the other extreme are the nature conquerors, who have no pa\
\pard\pardeftab720\li185

\fs11 \cf0 t \
\pard\pardeftab720\li732\fi-433\sl383

\fs25 \cf0 '6Itience with an old-fashioned outdoor farm, let alone a wilderness. These people divide all reality into two parts: human good, which they define as profit, comfort, and 
\f2\fs21 ~~curity; 
\f1\fs25 and everything 
\f2\fs21 ~se, 
\f1\fs25 which they understand as a stockpile o(':1ahlral resources"
\f2\fs35 -~r 
\f1\fs25 [!:aw materials:\\which will sooner or later be transformed into human good. The aimscft these militant tinkerers invariably manage to be at once unimpeachable and \
\pard\pardeftab720\li7805\sa135

\fs14 \cf0 /"" \
\pard\pardeftab720\li740\sl383\sa75

\fs25 \cf0 SUspect. They wish.,.,.earnestly, for example, to solve what they call "the problem of hungerj-if it can be done glamorously, comfortably, -and profitably. They believe that the ability to do something is the reason to do it. According to a recent press release from the University of Illinois College of Agriculture, researchers there 
\f2\fs28 ar~
\f1\fs25 looking forward tot'food production without either farmers or farms'J(This is perhaps the first explicit acknowledgment of the program that has been implicit in the work of the land-grant universities for forty or fifty years.) \
\pard\pardeftab720\li350

\f2\fs27 \cf0 ~
\f0\fs26 If I 
\f1\fs25 had to choose, 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs25 would join the nature extremists against the \
\pard\pardeftab720\li10197\sa210

\f2\fs9 \cf0 ~\
\pard\pardeftab720\li815

\f1\fs25 \cf0 echnology extremists, but this choice seems poor, even assuming that 
\fs18 \dn9 \sub It \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li735\sa210

\f2\fs14 \cf0 ~ -~ 
\f0\fs23 \dn9 \sub :t\up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li740\sl383

\f1\fs20 \cf0 It IS 
\fs25 possible. I would prefer to stay in the middle, not to avoid taking 
\f0\fs17 \dn7 \sub I
\f2\fs16 ~ 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub Sides, but because I think the middle 
\i\fs29 is 
\i0\fs25 a side, as well as the realloca-\up17 \super !: \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li192\fi-193\sl418\sa75
\cf0 . tion ofthe problem. 
\i\fs49 ;tS:\\ 
\i0\fs54 . \\
\i Y 
\f0\i0 \up30 \super !\\ \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li760\fi-553\sl386

\f1\fs25 \cf0 , 
\f2\fs39 ~The
\f1\fs25 middle, of course, is always rather roomy and bewildering 
\f2\fs39 te~rl-~' 
\f1\fs25 tory, and so I should state plainly the assumptions that define the grOUnd on which I intend to stand: \
\pard\pardeftab720\li762\fi372\sl380

\f0\fs27 \cf0 1. 
\f1\fs25 We live in a wilderness, in which we and our works occupy a tiny sPace and playa tiny part. We exist under its dispensation and by its \
\pard\pardeftab720\li10015

\f0\fs26 \cf0 ".j\
\pard\pardeftab720\li740\sl383

\f1\fs25 \cf0 tOlerance. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa60
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\sa75\qj

\fs28 \cf0 wild,!> \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\f0\fs20 \cf0 , \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa283\qj

\fs8 \cf0 i ' \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\qj

\f1\fs28 \cf0 we do \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qj

\f0\fs12 \cf0 i \
\pard\pardeftab720\li547\sl376\sa75\qj

\f1\fs28 \cf0 live, 
\fs29 J 
\fs27 inotU with\} \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\qj

\fs46 \cf0 to 
\f0\fs25 pn" \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\sa75\qj

\f1\fs29 \cf0 that 
\f2\fs17 ,~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\sa210\qj

\f0\fs27 \cf0 becal""
\f1\fs9 (\
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa540\qj

\i\fs47 \cf0 , lri\\ 
\f1\i0\fs44 11 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\f0\fs81 \cf0 ,&amI \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\qj

\f1\fs28 \cf0 it 
\fs27 is 
\fs34 If \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1030\sa135\qj

\f0\fs19 \cf0 1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\sa135\qj

\f2\fs39 \cf0 for~I\'b7'\
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\qj

\f0\fs27 \cf0 foret, \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\sa75\qj

\f1 \cf0 thab \
\pard\pardeftab720\li567\sa75\qj

\f2\fs59 \cf0 :~f 
\f0\fs21 \up60 \super ! \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa400
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li4640\qj

\f1\i\fs25 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 519 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa75\qj

\f0\fs10 \cf0 '1\\ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa75\qj

\fs22 \cf0 'Ii \
\pard\pardeftab720\li317\fi170\ri150\sl378\sa75\qj

\f1\fs32 \cf0 or 
\fs25 wildness and domesticity. But it is also a mistake to assume that 
\f0\fs19 u 
\fs9 \up19 \super 'I 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub , there is no difference between the natural and the human. If these \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\qj

\fs18 \cf0 :'1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa210\qj

\f0\fs12 \cf0 ,11\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi-9373\ri0\sa147\qj

\f1\fs25 \cf0 things could be divided, our life would be far simpler and easier than it 	
\f0\fs8 \up20 \super 'I \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9860\fi-9373\sl203\sa210\qj

\f1\fs25 \cf0 is, just as it would be if they were not different. Our problem, exactly, is 	
\f0 \dn5 \sub ;, 
\f2\fs13 ~
\f0\fs25 I :: 
\fs7 I: 
\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub ,I
\fs27 Ii
\fs20 "JI'"II \
\pard\pardeftab720\li150\fi340\sl376\sa355\qj

\f1\fs25 \cf0 thatGbe human and the natural are indivisible, and yet are differentl 
\f0\fs22 ,'i 
\f2\fs18 ~:I 
\f0\fs42 f'9\\ 
\f1\fs25 The indivisibility of wildness and domesticity, even within the 
\fs48 rab
\f0\fs16 \up5 \super ':1 \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9880\sa255\qj

\f1\fs25 \cf0 i: 
\f0\fs12 !!I \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9875\fi-9875\sa355\qj

\fs43 \cf0 ,l..!rit 
\f1\fs25 of human life itself, is easy enough to demonstrate. Our bodily life, 	
\f0\fs22 \up8 \super li'lf,I'1
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub !
\f2\fs13 I:~ 
\f1\fs16 r\
\pard\pardeftab720\li10132\qj

\f0\fs2 \cf0 i \
\pard\pardeftab720\li487\sl383\sa75

\f1\fs25 \cf0 to begin at the nearest place, is half wild. Perhaps it is more than half 
\fs18 \up13 \super :\\\\ 
\f0\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub 'i 
\f1 wild, for it is dependent upon reflexes, instincts, and appetites that 
\f2\fs43 \dn8 \sub '~,fl!1\up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9880\sa135\qj

\fs25 \cf0 ~
\fs10 !~ 
\f0\fs16 'I
\fs11 l \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi-9373\ri0\sa75\qj

\f1\fs28 \cf0 we 
\fs25 do not cause or intend and that we cannot, or had better not, stop. We 	
\f2\fs17 ~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li500\fi9377\ri202\sl220\sa210\qj

\f1\fs23 \cf0 ]
\fs25 live, partly, because we are domestic creatuEes-that is, we participate \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa75\qj

\f2\fs23 \cf0 ~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa75\qj

\f0\fs16 \cf0 p\
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa210\qj

\f1\fs15 \cf0 \'b7:1\
\pard\pardeftab720\li9380\fi-9380\qc

\f0\fs29 \cf0 in 
\f1\fs25 our human economy to the extent that we 
\f2\fs32 ~ake
\f1\fs25 a living:Jve are able, 	
\f0\fs8 ,
\f2\fs10 ;~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa135\qj

\f1\fs17 \cf0 ';)\
\pard\pardeftab720\li9280\fi-9280\sa147\qc

\fs25 \cf0 with variable success, to discipline our appetites and instincts in order 	
\f2\fs18 \dn7 \sub ,.~ \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9882\ri207\sa283\qj

\f1\fs25 \cf0 r\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi-9373\ri0\qj

\fs46 \cf0 to 
\fs25 produce this artifact, this human living. And yet it is equally true 	
\fs22 J \
\pard\pardeftab720\li547\sl376\qj

\fs25 \cf0 that we breathe and our hearts beat and we survive as a species \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9880\qj

\fs10 \cf0 11 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li870\fi-365\sl383

\fs25 \cf0 because we are wild. The same is true of a healthy human economy as it branches up\
\pard\pardeftab720\li510\fi-365\sl383\qj
\cf0 l!iard out of the soil. The topsoil, to the extent that it is fertile, is wild; 
\fs29 it 
\fs25 is a dark wilderness, ultimately unknowable, teeming with wildlife. A forest or a crop, no matter how intentionally husbanded by human foresters or farmers, will be found to be healthy precisely to the extent that it is wild-able to collaborate with earth, air, light, and water in the way common to plants before humans walked the earth. We know from experience that we can increase our domestic demands upon Plants so far that we force them into kinds of failure that wild plants do \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl371

\f2\fs23 \cf0 d~t
\f1\fs25 experience. 
\f2\fs40 @~eeders
\f1\fs25 of domestic animals, likewise, know that, when a breeding program is too much governed by human intention, by economic con\
\pard\pardeftab720\li547\sl376\sa440\qj
\cf0 side,rations, or by fashion, uselessness is the result']ize or productivity, for Instance, will be gained at the cost of health, vIgor, or reproductive ability. In other words, so-called domestic animals must remain half Wild, or more than half, because they are creatures of nature. Humans 
\fs33 are 
\fs25 intelligent enough to select for a type of creature; they are not intelligent enough to 
\i\fs29 make 
\i0\fs25 a creature. Their efforts to make an entirely domestic animal, like their efforts to make an entirely domestic human, \
\pard\pardeftab720\li660\sa147\qj

\i \cf0 520 
\b\fs23 Wendell Berry 
\i0\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li650\sl383\sa75\qj

\fs26 \cf0 are doomed to failure because they do not have and undoubtedly are never going to have the full set of production standards for the making of creatures. From a human point of view, then, creature making is wild. The effort to make plants, animals, and humans ever more governable by human intentions is continuing with more determination and more violence than ever, but that does not mean that it is nearer to success. 
\f0\fs25 It 
\f1\fs26 means only that we are increasing the violence and the magnitude of the expectable reactions. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\f2\fs27 \cf0 ~
\f0\fs48 0\\ 
\f1\fs26 To be 
\f2\fs27 divi~e~ 
\f1\fs26 against 
\f2\fs27 n~ture, ag~inst 
\f1\fs26 wildness, then, is a human dis\
\pard\pardeftab720\li627\fi-628\ri1422\sl380\sa370\qj
\cf0 vaster because It IS to be dIvIded agaInst ourselves. 
\f0 It 
\f1 confines our identity as creatures entirely within the bounds of our own understanding, which is invariab1y a mistake because it is invariably reductive. 
\f0 It 
\f1 reduces our largeness, our mystery, to a petty and sickly comprehensibility. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li130\sl380\qj
\cf0 : "'\'b7\'b7.But to say that we are not divided and not dividable from nature ifSl \
\pard\pardeftab720\li657\fi-435\sl383\qj

\f0 \cf0 --/' / to say that there is no difference between us and the other creatures. Human nature partakes of nature, participates in it, is dependent on it, and yet is different from it. We feel the difference as discomfort or 
\f2\fs20 diffi~ 
\f1\fs26 culty or danger. Nature is not easy to live with. 
\f0 It 
\f1 is hard to have rain on your cut hay, or floodwater over your cropland, or coyotes in your sheep; it is hard when nature does not respect your intentions, and she never does exactly respect them. Moreover, such problems belong to all of us, to the human lot. Humans who do not experience them are exempt only because they are paying (or underpaying) other humans such as farmers to deal with nature on their behalf. Further, it is not just agriculture-dependent humanity that has had to put up with natural dangers and frustrations; these have been the lot of hunting and gathering societies also, and the wild creatures do not always live 
\f2\fs19 com~ 
\f1\fs26 fortably or easily with nature either. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl378\qc

\f0\fs12 \cf0 / i ----, 
\f1\fs26 But humans differ most from other creatures in the extent to which 
\f0\fs34 <.__
\f1\fs26 ..Jthey must be 
\i\fs25 made 
\i0\fs26 what they are-that is, in the extent to which they \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9162\qj

\f0\fs93 \cf0 d \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl378\qc

\f1\fs26 \cf0 are artifacts of their culture. 
\f0 It 
\f1 is true that what we might as well call culture does go into the making of some birds and animals, but this \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl378\sa2075\qc

\f0 \cf0 teaching is so much less than the teaching that makes a human as to be almost a different thing. To take a creature who is biologically a \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li3465\sa637\qj

\f2\fs6 \cf0 ~
\f1\fs4 ---------------------------
\f2\fs6 -~~~~~-----~----------
\f0\fs32 .... \
\pard\pardeftab720\li6047\ri1697\sa147\qj

\f1\i\fs26 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 521 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri1697\sl380\qr
\cf0 human and to make him or her fully human is a task that requires 
\fs28 many 
\fs26 years (some of us sometimes fear that it requires more than a lifetime), and this long effort of human making is necessary, I think, because of our power. In the hierarchy of power among the earth's creatures, we are at the top, and we have been growing stronger for a long time. 
\fs28 We 
\fs26 are now, to ourselves, incomprehensibly powerful, capable of doing more damage than floods, storms, volcanoes, and earthquakes. And so it is more important than ever that we should have cultures capable of making us into humans------creatures capable of prudence, justice, fortitude, temperance, and the other virtues. For our history reveals that, stripped of the restraints, disciplines, and ameliorations of culture, humans are not "natural," not "thinking 
\f2\fs29 ani~;ls;;~or"-:;~ake'd 
\f1\fs26 apes," but monsters-indiscriminate and insatiable killers and destroyers. We differ from other creatures, partly, in our susceptibility to monstrosity. 
\f0\fs27 It 
\f1\fs26 is perhaps for this reason that, in the wake of the great wars of our century, we have seen poets such as T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, and David Jones making an effort to reweave the tattered garment of cul
\f2\fs21 r:~re 
\f1\fs26 and to reestablish the cultural tasks, which are, as Pound put it, \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1897\fi-193\ri1705\sl378\qj

\fs30 \cf0 LTo 
\fs26 know the histories / to know good from evil/And know whom to trustE).nd we see, if we follow Pound a little further, that the recovery of culture involves, leads to, or is the recovery of nature: \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi6467\ri0\sl331\sa75

\f0\fs25 \cf0 i 
\f1\fs26 the trees rise 
\f0\fs28 \dn6 \sub I, 
\fs25 \up15 \super i 
\f1 \up0 \nosupersub and there is 
\fs26 a wide sward between them myrrh and olibanum on 
\f2\fs28 th~
\f1\fs26 stone givingp-errun1e,\
\pard\pardeftab720\li132\qj

\f2\fs19 \cf0 "~t\
\pard\pardeftab720\li5305\qj

\f1\fs26 \cf0 and where was nothing \
\pard\pardeftab720\li75\sa75\qj

\f0\fs20 \cf0 .Il 
\f1\fs28 d \
\pard\pardeftab720\li132\sa210\qj

\f2\fs21 \cf0 ~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li75\qj

\fs14 \cf0 \dn6 \sub :~ 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub now is furry assemblage \
\pard\pardeftab720\li75\sa210\qj

\fs22 \cf0 ;fll\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi-5695\ri0\sl246\sa75\qj

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \dn33 \sub ;f 
\fs25 \dn9 "! 
\f2 \up0 \nosupersub ~---~
\f1\fs26 the boughs now are voices 
\fs15 ..
\fs36 -----
\fs16 -..-. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa210\qj

\f0\fs26 \cf0 ;feh \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1322\ri1887\sl313\sa283\qj

\fs75 \cf0 @ 
\f1\fs28 In 
\fs26 the recovery of culture 
\i and 
\i0 nature is the knowledge of how to ley \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1907\ri1885\sl343\qj
\cf0 arm well, how to preserve, harvest, and replenish the forests, how 
\f2\fs23 \up6 \super ~1l 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub to make, build, and use, return and restore. In this 
\i\fs27 double 
\i0\fs26 recovery, 
\f2\fs25 '~is \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi1865\ri1700\sl293\sa210\qj

\f1\fs26 \cf0 which is the recovery of our humanity, is the hope that the don1estic 
\f0 j 
\f1\fs27 to \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl328

\f0\fs10 \cf0 \dn5 \sub 'I 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub and the wild can exist together in lasting harmony. 
\f0\fs32 f 
\f1\fs27 a 
\f0\fs16 \dn7 \sub :1"\up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li11000\qj

\fs25 \cf0 II \
\pard\pardeftab720\li11085\sa210\qj

\fs7 \cf0 ) \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa225\qj

\f1\i\fs25 \cf0 522 Wendell Berry 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\fs23 \cf0 This doubleness of allegiance and responsibility, difficult as 
\fs27 it 
\fs23 always is \
\pard\pardeftab720\li8757\ri80\sa75

\fs28 \cf0 in 
\fs23 the \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qj
\cf0 confusing as it sometimes is, apparently is inescapable. A culture 
\f2\fs26 tha~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li8760\ri127\sa75

\f1\fs23 \cf0 share \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qj
\cf0 does not measure itself by nature, 
\fs27 by 
\fs23 an understanding of its debts to 
\fs27 na\
\pard\pardeftab720\li8767\sa865

\fs23 \cf0 loves 
\f0\fs21 1. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa580
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li547\sl376\sa75\qj

\f1\fs23 \cf0 ture, becomes destructive of nature and thus of itself. 
\fs28 A 
\fs23 culture that 
\fs28 does 
\fs23 not measure itself by its own best 
\fs27 work 
\fs23 and the best work of other 
\fs27 CUl
\fs23 tures (the determination of which is its unending task) becomes destructive of itself and thus of nature. \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs55 \cf0 00'\\ 
\f1\fs23 Harmony is one phase, the good phase, of the inescapable dialogue \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1135\fi-600\sl380
\cf0 'Uehveen culture and nature. In this phase, humans consciously 
\fs29 and 
\f2\fs21 ~cienti0l!~!Y 
\f1\fs23 ask of their work: Is this good for us? Is this good 
\fs28 for 
\fs23 our place? And the questioning and answering in this phase is minutely particular: 
\fs27 It 
\fs23 can occur only with reference to particular artifacts
\f0\fs30 \dn9 \sub , 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub events, places, ecosystelTIS, and neighborhoods. When the cultural side 
\fs27 of 
\fs23 the dialogue becomes too theoretical or abstract, the other 
\fs27 phase, 
\fs28 the 
\fs23 bad one, begins. Then the conscious, responsible questions\'b7 are 
\fs28 not 
\fs23 asked; acts begin to be committed and things to be made on their own terms for their own sakes, culture deteriorates, and nature retaliates. (.('\\ The awareness that we are slowly growing into now is that the \
\pard\pardeftab720\li657\fi-518\sl380\sa75\qj

\f2\fs31 \cf0 ~\\~~rthlY 
\f1\fs23 wildness that we are so complexly dependent upon is at our mercy. 
\f0\fs26 It 
\f1\fs23 has become, in a sense, our artifact because 
\fs27 it 
\fs23 can only survive by a human understanding and forbearance that we now must make. rrhe only thing we have to preserve nature with is culture; the only thing we have to preserve wildness with is domesticity. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj

\f2\fs22 \cf0 (~"\\ 
\f1\fs23 To me, this means simply that we are not safe in assuming that we\
\pard\pardeftab720\li657\fi-658\sl378\qj

\fs75 \cf0 to	
\fs23 can preserve wildness by making wilderness preserves. Those of us who see that wildness and wilderness need to be preserved are going to have to understand the dependence of these things upon our domestic econOD1Y and our domestic behavior. If we do not have an economy capable of valuing in particular terms the durable good of localities and communities, then we are not going to be able to preserve anything. We are going to have to see that, if we want our forests to last, then we must nlake \\vood products that last, for our forests are more threatened by shoddy \\vorkmanship than by clear-cutting or by fire. Good workn1anship-that is, careful, considerate, and loving work-requires us to think considerately of the whole process, natural and cultural, involved \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl378\qc
\cf0 the 
\f2\fs19 bc~ 
\f1\fs23 under: 
\fs27 a dan' 
\fs23 with t. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\fs29 \cf0 and e; \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs23 \cf0 agnCl. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li292\sl373

\f2\fs20 \cf0 meal~~ 
\fs27 ~r.i\\ 
\f1 11' 
\fs23 ll!Yand 
\fs55 i: 
\fs26 . itivel; this ;: 
\fs23 the 
\fs18 I.' 
\fs27 wate\'b7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75

\f0\fs10 \cf0 I \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75

\f1\fs27 \cf0 and 
\f2\fs22 :~ \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs20 \cf0 , \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa225

\f1\fs28 \cf0 lariz \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa147\qc

\i\fs26 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 523 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li760\sl380\sa135\qj

\fs25 \cf0 in the making of wooden artifacts, because the good worker does not share the industrial contempt for "raw material." The good worker loves the board before it becomes a table, loves the tree before it yields the board, loves the forest before it gives up the tree. The good worker understands that a badly made artifact is both an insult to its user and a danger to its source. We could say, then, that good forestry begins with the respectful husbanding of the forest that we call stewardship and ends with well-n1ade tables and chairs and houses, just as good agriculture begins with stewardship of the fields and ends with good \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f0\fs23 \cf0 """"s . , \
\pard\pardeftab720\li760\sl380\sa75\qj

\f1\fs25 \cf0 meals.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li310\sa75\qj

\fs96 \cf0 rr 
\fs25 In other words, conservation is going to prove increasingly futile \
\pard\pardeftab720\li310\qj

\f2\fs42 \cf0 ~and
\f1\fs25 increasingly meaningless if its proscriptions are not answered pos\
\pard\pardeftab720\li760\sl380\qj
\cf0 itively by an economy that rewards and enforces good use. I would call this a loving economy, for it would strive to place a proper value on all the materials of the world, in all their metamorphoses from soil and water, air and light to the finished goods of our towns and households, and I think that the only effective motive for this would be a particularizing love for local things, rising out of local knowledge and local allegiance. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1157\fi-1158\sl380\sa1070\qj

\f0\fs53 \cf0 .. (fi:;?, 
\f1\fs25 Our present economy, by contrast, does not account for affection at all, which is to say that it does not account for value. 
\f0\fs26 It 
\f1\fs25 is simply a description of the career of money as it preys upon both nature and human society. Apparently because our age is so manifestly unconcerned for the life of the spirit, many people conclude that it places an undue value on material things. But that cannot be so, for people who valued material things would take care of them and would care for the sources of them. We could argue that an age that 
\f2\fs27 proper~v 
\f1\fs25 valued and cared for material things would be an age properly spiritual. In my part of the 
\fs26 COuntry, 
\fs25 the Shakers, "unworldly" as they were, were the true materialists, for they truly valued materials. And they valued them in the only 
\f0\fs26 way 
\f1\fs25 that such things 
\i\fs29 can 
\i0\fs25 be valued in practice: by good workmanship, 
\fs28 both 
\fs25 elegant and sound. The so-called materialisn1 of our own time is, 
\fs28 by 
\fs25 contrast, at once indifferent to spiritual concerns and insatiably destructive of the material world. And I would call our economy, not materialistic, but abstract, intent upon the subversion of both spirit and \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa1040
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\sa225\qj

\i \cf0 524 
\b Wendell Berry 
\i0\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\sa3795\qj

\fs26 \cf0 n1atter by abstractions of value and of po\\ver. In such an economy, 
\fs28 it is \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa80
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\qj

\fs26 \cf0 impossible to value anything that one 
\i\fs25 has. 
\i0\fs26 What one has (house or job\
\pard\pardeftab720\li8262\sa135\qj

\f0\fs28 \cf0 , \
\pard\pardeftab720\li760\sl380\qj

\f1\fs26 \cf0 spouse or car) is only valuable insofar as it can be exchanged for 
\fs29 what 
\fs26 one believes that one wants-a limitless economic process based 
\f0\fs23 UPon 
\f1\fs26 boundless dissatisfaction. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1777\fi-1138\ri1645\sl380\sa355

\fs57 \cf0 (tV 
\fs26 Now that the practical processes of industrial civilization have 
\f2\fs28 ~become
\f1\fs26 so threatening to humanity and to nature, it is easy for us, or for some of us, to see that practicality needs to be made subject to sPiritual values and spiritual measures. But we must not forget that it is also necessary for spirituality to be responsive to practical questions. For human beings the spiritual and the practical are, and should be, inseparable. Alone, practicality becon1es dangerous; spirituality, alone, becomes feeble and pointless. Alone, either becomes dull. Each is the other's discipline, in a sense, and in good work the two are joined. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1030\qj

\f0\fs12 \cf0 t"-. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li132\qj

\f2\fs32 \cf0 ,~ 
\f1\fs26 \\j'he 
\f2\fs32 di~ity 
\f1\fs26 of toil is 
\f2\fs32 u~de~mined 
\f1\fs26 when 
\f2\fs32 it~ 
\f1\fs26 necessity is gone," \
\pard\pardeftab720\li732\fi-543\sl383\sa75\qj
\cf0 . 
\f2\fs35 ~>,kathleen 
\f1\fs26 Rame says, and she 
\fs19 IS 
\fs26 nghQt 
\fs19 IS 
\fs26 an mSlght that we dare not ignore, and I would emphasize that it applies to 
\i\fs28 all 
\i0\fs26 toil. What is not needed is frivolous. Everything depends on our right relation to necessity-and therefore on our right definition of necessity. In defining our necessity, we must be careful to discount the subsidies, the unrepaid borrowings, from nature that have so far sustained industrial civilization: the "cheap" fossil fuels and ores; the forests that have been cut down and not replanted; the virgin soils of much of the world, whose \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\sa370\qj
\cf0 fertility has not been replenished. 
\f2\fs31 I~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li760\sl380\qj

\f1\fs25 \cf0 And so, though I am trying to unspecialize the idea and the 
\f2\fs52 jO~
\f1\fs25 serving wildness, I am not against wilderness preservation. I am only pointing out, as the Reagan administration has done, that the wildernesses we are trying to preserve are standing squarely in the 
\f0\fs22 way 
\f1\fs25 of our present economy, and that the wildernesses cannot survive if our ,conomy does not change. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li867\sa75\qj

\fs10 \cf0 \\ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li867\qj

\fs26 \cf0 ) The reason to preserve wilderness is that we need it. We need \
\pard\pardeftab720\li740\fi-130\sl386\sa3795\qj
\cf0 -wilderness of all kinds, large and small, public and private. We need to go now and again into places where our work is disallowed, where our hopes and plans have no standing. We need to come into the presence \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa160
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa147\qj

\i\b\fs25 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 
\b0 525 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl380\qj
\cf0 of the unqualified and mysterious formality of Creation. And I would agree with Edward Abbey that we need as well some tracts of what he 
\f2\fs38 calls~SOlut~ ~~lderness," 
\f1\fs25 hich 0hrough general agreement;;one of us enters at all." 
\i\fs31 i 
\f2\i0\fs19 ~ \

\f1\fs25 .\'95 
\f2\fs26 ~
\f1\fs25 We need wilO'erness also because wildness-nature-is one of our \
\pard\pardeftab720\li460\fi-460\sl378\sa225\qj
\cf0 l.3dispensable studies. We need to understand it as our source and preserver, as an essential measure of our history and behavior, and as the ultimate definer of our possibilities. There are, I think, three questions that must be asked with respect to a human econolny in any given \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi375\sl380\qj

\fs25 \cf0 The second and third questions are obviously/the ones that would define agendas of practical research and of work. 
\fs26 If 
\f1\fs25 we do not work with and within natural tolerances, then we will not be permitted to work for long. 
\f0\fs26 It 
\f1\fs25 is plain enough, for example, that if we use soil fertil
\fs26 ity 
\fs25 faster than nature can replenish it, we are proposing an end that we do not desire. And to ignore the possibility of help from nature makes farming, for example, too expensive for farmers-as we are seeing. It 
\f0\fs26 may 
\f1\fs25 make life too expensive for humans. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li460\fi-460\sl378\qj

\f0\fs60 \cf0 @ 
\f1\fs25 But the second and third questions are ruled by the first. They cannot be answered-they cannot intelligently be asked-until the first has been answered. And yet the first question has not been answered, or asked, so far as I know, in the \\vhole history of the American economy. 
\fs28 All 
\fs25 the great changes, from the Indian wars and the opening of agricultural frontiers to the inauguration of genetic engineering, have been made without a backward look and in ignorance of whereabouts. Our response to the forest and the prairie that covered our present fields was to get them out of the way as sopn as possible. And the obstructive human populations of Indians and \\:inefficientrreJr small farmers have been dealt with in the same spirit. We have never Tnown what we were doing because we have never known what we were undoing. We cannot know What we are doing until we know what nature would be doing if we 
\f0 Were 
\f1 doing nothing. And that is why we need small native wildernesses \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs17 \cf0 it \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa147\qc

\f2\fs16 \cf0 ~! \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa283\qc

\f0\fs5 \cf0 :1'.11.'\
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f1\fs44 \cf0 t \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa585\qc

\fs11 \cf0 "Ii \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa210\qc

\f0\fs31 \cf0 'it \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa370\qc

\fs46 \cf0 ,I \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\fs12 \cf0 ,,1',\'b71\
\pard\pardeftab720\qc
\cf0 '." \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f1\fs16 \cf0 :':J1 ' \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl238\sa225\qc

\f0\fs37 \cf0 ,
\f2\fs16 ~:I
\f0\fs13 j 
\fs19 "ill
\fs28 \dn13 \sub .) \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f1\fs25 \cf0 ":1\\ \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa370\qc

\f0\fs22 \cf0 .l! \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs23 \cf0 ,J
\fs14 ,1,1' \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa370\qc

\f1\fs35 \cf0 .ij \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\f0\fs17 \cf0 ,1 
\f1\fs6 \up15 \super \\ 
\f0\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub ' \
\pard\pardeftab720\li132\sa75\qj

\fs8 \cf0 i,. 
\fs25 "1' 
\fs2 \up20 \super , \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\li75\qj

\fs25 \cf0 . \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qj

\fs8 \cf0 : 
\fs7 ; \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa1340\qc

\fs22 \cf0 I : 
\fs2 \up20 \super : \up0 \nosupersub \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\f1\fs25 \cf0 1'1;' " \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f0\fs14 \cf0 !' 
\fs20 'I \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f1\fs15 \cf0 11 
\f0\fs31 'i \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs21 \cf0 h \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\fs15 \cf0 '! 
\f1\fs11 11 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\f0\fs9 \cf0 . 
\f1\fs14 '\\ \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\f0\fs23 \cf0 Ii \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs13 \cf0 , Ii \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\f1\fs10 \cf0 " 11 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f0\i\fs33 \cf0 it) 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri170\qj

\fs30 \cf0 \dn12 \sub I
\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub I,i, \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri170\sa225\qj

\fs10 \cf0 ;1;1',' \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa135\qc

\f1\fs9 \cf0 ,e\
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f0\fs11 \cf0 lli!,,!:\'b7:\'b7\'b7\'b7:,\'b7\'b7I,.1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\fs15 \cf0 I:' \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa225\qc

\fs22 \cf0 :
\f2\fs17 ~ 
\f0\fs22 I',: \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\fs9 \cf0 : ' \
\pard\pardeftab720\li607\sa225

\f1\i\fs26 \cf0 526 Wendell Berry 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75
\cf0 widely dispersed over the countryside as well as large ones in sPectac .. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li607\sa75
\cf0 ular places. \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs73 \cf0 'i.f\\ 
\f2\fs36 ~o~~v:r, 
\f1\fs26 to say that. wilderness and wildness are indispensable 
\fs32 to \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1135\fi-600\sl380\sa355

\fs26 \cf0 \\!:.:Jus, mdlvlslble [rom us, IS not to say that we can find sufficient 
\fs35 stan. 
\fs26 dards for our life and work in nature. To suggest that, for humans there is a simple equation between &atural" and "good" is to fall pre; immediately to the cynics who love to point out that, after all, "every_ thing is natural.:::lhey are, of course, correct. Nature provides 
\f2\fs34 bounti~ 
\f1\fs26 fully for her children, but, as we would now say, she is also extremely permissive. If her children want to destroy one another entirely 
\fs19 Or 
\fs26 to commit suicide, that is all right with her. There is nothing, after all
\f0\fs28 \dn9 \sub , 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub more natural than the extinction of species; the extinction of 
\i\fs27 all 
\i0\fs26 species
\f0\fs28 \dn8 \sub , 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub we must assume, would also be perfectly natural. 
\f2\fs33 (-~ 
\f1\fs26 Clear!
\i y, 
\i0 if we want to argue for the existence of the world as we 
\f2\fs35 ~now
\f1\fs26 it, we will have to find some way of qualifying and supplementing this relentless criterion 
\f2\fs38 o~atural.'\}erhaPS 
\f1\fs26 we can do so only by a reaffirmation of a lesser kind of naturalness-that of self-interest. Certainly human self-interest has much wickedness to answer for, and we are living in just fear of it; nevertheless, we must take care not to condemn it absolutely. After all, we value this passing work of nature that we call "the natural world," with its graceful plenty of animals and plants, precisely because 
\i\fs28 we 
\i0\fs26 need it and love it and want it for a home. ',.\{ We are creatures obviously subordinate to nature, dependent upon \
\pard\pardeftab720\li202\sl371
\cf0 .. '. 
\f2\fs22 ~ 
\f0\fs28 L 
\f1\fs26 "'-la;vild world that we did not make. And yet we are joined to that larger ''-ti'ature by our own nature, a part of which is our self-interest. A com\
\pard\pardeftab720\li650\sl383\qj
\cf0 mon complaint nowadays is that humans think the world is "anthropocentric," or human-centered. I understand the complai;rt;-me assumptions of so-called anthropocentrism often result in gross and dangerous insubordination. And yet I don't know how the human species can avoid some version of self-centeredness; I don't know how any species can. An earthworm, I think, is living in an earthwormcentered world; the thrush who eats the earthworm is living in a thrush-centered world; the hawk who eats the thrush is living in a hawkcentered world. Each creature, that is, does what is necessary in its own behalf, and is domestic in its own 
\i\fs29 domus 
\i0\fs26 or home. \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f0\fs23 \cf0 ] \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f1\fs11 \cf0 1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\f0 \cf0 j \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa75\qc

\fs17 \cf0 i \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa1120\qc

\fs23 \cf0 I \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa2765\qc

\fs106 \cf0 \dn81 \sub d 
\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub 1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa685\qc

\f1\fs9 \cf0 q \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc

\f0\fs40 \cf0 ___________________________________
\f2\fs56 c_rl~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li4895\ri1587\sa147\qj

\f1\i\fs26 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 527 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li715\fi-193\sl383\sa75\qj

\f2\fs42 \cf0 ~umans
\f1\fs25 differ from earthworms, thrushes, and hawks in their capacity to do more-in modern times, a great deal more-in their own behalf than is necessary. Moreover, the vast majority of humans in the industrial nations are guilty of this extravagance. One of the oldest human arguments is over the question of how much is necessary. How much must humans do in their own behalf in order to be fully human? The number and variety of the answers ought to notify us that we never have known for sure, and yet we have the disquieting suspicion that, almost always, the honest answer has been "Jess." \
\pard\pardeftab720\li380\ri1577\qj

\f2\fs32 \cf0 ~e
\f1\fs25 have no way to work at this question, it seems to me, except by \
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\fi417\sl378\sa75\qj
\cf0 eiving that, in order to have the world, we must share it, both with each other and with other creatures, which is immediately complicated 
\fs28 by 
\fs25 the further perception that, in order to live in the world, we must use it somewhat at the expense of other creatures. We must acknowledge both the centrality and the limits of our self-interest. One can hardly imagine a tougher situation. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li250\qj

\f2\fs38 \cf0 ~But
\f1\fs25 in the recognition of the difficulty of our situation is a kind of \
\pard\pardeftab720\li725\fi-485\sl383\sa605\qj

\f2\fs39 \cf0 ~ef,
\f1\fs25 for it makes us give up the hope that a solution can be found in a simple preference for humanity over nature or nature over humanity. The only solutions we have ahead of us will need to be worked for and worked out. They will have to be practical solutions, resulting in good local practice. There is work to do that can be done. 
\f2\fs27 ~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\li7210\sa370\qj

\f1\i\fs50 \cf0 \dn27 \sub ib
\i0\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub ..\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri1565\sl380\qr
\cf0 , 
\f2\fs36 ~s
\f1\fs25 .we undertake this work, perhaps the greatest immediate anger 
\fs28 les 
\fs25 In our dislike of ourselves as a species. This is an understandable dislike-we are justly afraid of ourselves-but we are nevertheless obliged to think and act out of a proper self-interest and a genuine selfrespect as human beings. Otherwise, we will allow our dislike and fear of Ourselves to justify further abuses of one another and the world. We must come to terms with the fact that it is not natural to be disloyal to \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9880\qj

\f0\fs16 \cf0 \dn8 \sub I 
\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub "\
\pard\pardeftab720\li747\qj

\f1 \cf0 one's own kind. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li750\fi372\sl380\sa75\qj
\cf0 For these reasons, there is great danger in the perception that "there are too many people," whatever truth may be in it, for this is a premise from which it is too likely that somebody, sooner or later, will prOCeed to a determination of 
\i\fs27 who 
\i0\fs25 are the surplus. 
\fs28 If 
\fs25 we conclude that \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\li525\sa147

\i \cf0 528 Wendell Berry 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li547\sl376\sa210\qj
\cf0 there are too many, it is hard to avoid the further conclusion that there are some we do not need. But how Inany do we need, and which ones? \\Vhich ones, novv apparently unnecessary, may turn out later to be 
\fs28 in
\fs25 dispensable? We do not know; it is a part of our mystery, our wildness \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa135

\f0\fs28 \cf0 , \
\pard\pardeftab720\li87\fi475\sl383

\f1\fs25 \cf0 that we do not know . 
\f0\fs37 ....,.-<'\\ 
\fs26 I 
\f1\fs25 would argue that, at least for us in the United States, the conclu',,"._Jdon that "there are too many people" is premature, not because 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs25 know \
\pard\pardeftab720\li547\sl376\qj
\cf0 that there are 
\i\fs28 not 
\i0\fs25 too many people, but because 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs25 do not think we are prepared to come to such a conclusion. 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs25 grant that questions about population size need to be asked, but they are not the 
\i\fs28 first 
\i0\fs25 questions that need to be asked. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li687\fi-145\sl383

\f2\fs23 \cf0 r>~\\ 
\f1\fs25 The "population problem," initially, should be examined as a prob
\i\fs28 '__ /Aem, 
\i0\fs25 not of quantity, but of pattern. Before we conclude that we have too many people, we 111USt ask if we have people who are misused 
\f0\fs28 \dn7 \sub , 
\f1\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub people who are ll1isplaced, or people who are abusing the places they have. The facts of most immediate importance may be, not how many we are, but where we are and what we are doing. At any rate, the attempt to solve our problems by reducing our nun1bers may be a distraction from the overriding population statistic of our tin1e: that 
\i\fs29 one 
\i0\fs25 human with a nuclear bomb and the will to use it is 
\fs27 100 
\fs25 percent too many. 
\f0\fs26 I 
\f1\fs25 would argue that it is not human fecundity that is overcrowding the 
\f2\fs20 ~'orld 
\f1\fs25 so 
\fs26 Il1uch 
\fs25 as technological ll1ultipliers of the power of individual hurnans. The worst disease of the world now is probably the ideology of technological heroism, according to \\vhich more and more people \\villingly cause large-scale effects that they do not foresee and that they cannot control. This is the ideology of the professional class of the industrial nations-a class whose allegiance to communities and places has been dissolved by their economic motives and by their educations. These are people who will go anywhere and jeopardize any\
\pard\pardeftab720\li317\fi87\sl368

\f2\fs21 \cf0 ~ing
\f1\fs25 in order to assure the success of their careers. .. .
\f0\i\fs5 \up37 \super J 
\i0\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub ,'!/ 
\f1 We mayor may not have rOO1l1 for more people, but It 
\fs18 IS 
\fs25 certaIn that \
\pard\pardeftab720\li582\fi-203\sl383\sa982\qj
\cf0 -we do not have more room for technological heroics. We do not need any more thousand-dollar solutions to ten-dollar problems or million-dollar solutions to thousand-dollar problems-or ll1ultibillion-dollar solutions where there was never a problem at all. We have no way to compute the \
\pard\pardeftab720\li4647\sa147

\i\fs26 \cf0 Preserving Wildness 529 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li487\sl383\sa210

\fs25 \cf0 inhabitability of our places; we cannot weigh or measure the pleasures we take in them; we cannot say how many dollars domestic tranquillity is worth. And yet we must now learn to bear in mind the memory of communities destroyed, disfigured, or made desolate 
\fs26 by 
\fs25 technological events, as well 
\f0\fs45 '1, 
\f1\fs25 the memory of families dispossessed, displaced, and impoverished b\\2labor-saving" 
\f2\fs34 machine~t?e 
\f1\fs25 issue of human obsolescence may 
\f0\fs27 be 
\f1\fs25 more urgent for us now than the issue of human 
\f2\fs23 pOPulation.:r-~\
\pard\pardeftab720\li7115\sa75

\f0\fs54 \cf0 "7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li467\fi-468\ri1752\sl383

\f2\fs28 \cf0 ~he
\f1\fs25 population issue thus leads directly to the issue of proportlO and scale. What is the proper amount of power for a human to use? What are the proper limits of human enterprise? How may these proprieties be determined? Such questions may seem inordinately difficult, but that is because we have gone too long without asking them. One of the fundamental assumptions of industrial economics has been that such questions are outmoded and that we need never ask them again. The failure of that assumption now requires us to reconsider the claims of wildness and to renew our understanding of the old ideas of propriety and harmony. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li402\fi-403\ri1765\sl378

\f0\fs66 \cf0 aD 
\f1\fs25 When we propose that humans should learn to behave properly WIth respect to nature so as to place their domestic economy harmo\
\pard\pardeftab720\li9712\sa135

\fs12 \cf0 ;U \
\pard\pardeftab720\li487\sl383\sa135

\fs25 \cf0 niously upon and within the sustaining and surrounding wilderness, then we make possible a sort of landscape criticism. Then we can see that it is not primarily the number of people inhabiting a landscape that determines the propriety of the ratio and the relation between human domesticity and wildness, but it is the way the people divide the landscape and use it. We can see that it is the landscape of monoculture in which both nature and humanity are most at risk. We feel the human 
\fs12 \up19 \super ! 
\fs25 \up0 \nosupersub fragility of the huge one-class housing development, just as we feel the natural fragility of the huge one-crop field. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9555

\f0\fs29 \cf0 I\
\pard\pardeftab720\li130

\fs76 \cf0 \'ae 
\f1\fs25 ,Looking at the monocultures of industrial civilization, we yearn with \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9712

\f0\fs17 \cf0 il \
\pard\pardeftab720\li735

\f1\fs25 \cf0 kInd of homesickness for the humanness and the naturalness of a \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9712

\f0\fs28 \cf0 I\
\pard\pardeftab720\li525

\f1\fs25 \cf0 highly diversified, multipurpose landscape, democratically divided, with \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9712\sa75

\f0\fs22 \cf0 II \
\pard\pardeftab720\li487\sl383\sa225

\f1\fs25 \cf0 many margins. The margins are of the utmost importance. They are the 
\f2\fs32 ~ 
\f1\fs25 diVisions between holdings, as well as between kinds of work and kinds of land. These 
\f2\fs28 margins~lanes, 
\f1\fs25 streams ides , wooded fencerows, and the \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9555\sa210

\f0\fs2 \cf0 I \
\pard\pardeftab720\li9555\sa75

\f1\fs14 \cf0 P \
\pard\pardeftab720\li350\sa75

\f0\fs59 \cf0 l \
\pard\pardeftab720

\f2\fs23 \cf0 ~ \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa147\qj

\f1\i\fs25 \cf0 530 Wendell Berry 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl380\sa370\qj

\fs26 \cf0 like-are always freeholds of wildness, where limits are set on human intention. Such places are hospitable to the wild lives of plants and ani. mals and to the wild play of human children. They enact, within the bounds of hun1an domesticity itself, a human courtesy toward the wild that is one of the best safeguards of designated tracts of true wilderness. This is the landscape of harmony, safer far for life of all kinds than the landscape of monoculture. And we should not neglect to notice that 
\f0\fs25 \dn7 \sub , 
\f1 \up0 \nosupersub whereas the monocultural landscape is totalitarian in tendency, the landscape of harmony is democratic and free. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li5370\sa5287\qj

\i \cf0 Home Economics (1987) }